That looks like it's turning.
I don't have my glasses on.
Yes, it does.
Thank you.
Congratulations on this wonderful new book.
I guess maybe to enter the discussion, the concept of it, you are doing a quartet of novels, I gather.
Yes.
Maybe if you could just tell me a little bit about that, the motivation for that.
Why a quartet?
I think at first I had the idea of writing a sort of long novel because it was partly with reading Proust when I was at college or just after.
And then I had this idea that I had lived through a little bit of history, what was the war in the 1950s.
I sort of had the idea at the beginning of the 60s that
actually had a sense of time.
I think when you start writing novels in your early 20s, you don't actually have a sense of time having fast.
So I thought I would write a longish novel with several main characters.
And then it became a quartet.
The idea was originally to have the first one, which was The Virgin in the Garden, as a kind of nostalgic looking back to the days of Shakespearean English.
and possibly also the big 19th century novel.
Then I was going to do two more experimental ones, which was Still Life, which was going to be what I thought of as my biological novel, describing birth and death very, very barely and precisely.
Then this one was always meant to be the linguistic novel, which is why it's called Babel Tower.
It was meant to be the one about
how language flew apart into fragments and everybody began to speak with a closed.
It's a wonderful title.
It's a good title, yes.
It was called Evidence for a long time when I was thinking about it.
Then it came to me with its real name, this Babel Tower.
And then, of course, they were able to put all sorts of, after that, metaphors of towers began to proliferate all over it.
Did the title come while it was a work in progress?
Yes, it came quite late, really.
I don't know much.
No, probably sort of at the beginning of the 90s, end of the 80s.
So how long was this work in progress, may I ask?
Well, I've been thinking about it, all of it, you know, bits of it, since about 1963.
I've been thinking for quite a long time, yes.
And when I've done the fourth one, that will be the end.
You think?
I'm pretty sure, because I've got another two books after that that I want to write.
You say you've been thinking about this since the 60s, and of course you have those cases of the 60s.
Did you kind of fix on them at that point, that you thought that they would be so... that you'd be using them as models for a novel in the late 1990s?
Well, I hoped to write it in the 1970s, but all sorts of things intervened and got in the way.
But I didn't mean to be writing it as late as the sort of mid-1990s.
I think it's probably on balance gained from me having been thinking about it for 20 years rather than writing it.
But do you write it, obviously you have to, but what's the perspective of a woman in the 1990s?
Oh, I think so.
I think there is much more, I think there's a different sort of ironic distance on the characters and the world than there would have been if I'd written it then.
I think it's a good afternoon.
How do you think it would have been different had you, in fact, done it in the 70s?
There were a lot of things that in the 60s, late 60s, early 70s, I found rather tedious and repulsive, you know, like the sort of theatre of cruelty.
It wasn't my favourite sort of theatre.
And all this idea that you should believe the Marquis de Sade and all the need to live in
communes and things and I found most of these you know not my sort of thing and not what I had been hoping for they're very interesting whereas now it all seems to me much more coherent as a set of movements and as a kind of spectrum of moral interest and moral anxiety you know from the immense sense of everybody loving everybody in whatever way they felt like all you need is love as the Beatles said
at one end, and the sort of people like Peter Brook, the theater impresario, putting on the Marat Sade, with the Naki de Sade directing the Mad Men in a performance of the death of Marat.
I think it was written by Peter Weiss.
And that was done to sort of upset and shock the audience, and to send great faissons of pleasure and cruelty through your blood.
um and I couldn't find a copy of it anywhere when I was writing this book in the 1990s. Really? And I finally got hold of one it's actually a very static and boring play. I think and I mean it's a brilliant idea that Marquis de Sade did put on plays in his lunatic asylum in Charenton um but
That is a fascinating concept.
Well, and it would have made a wonderful play when you actually read the play, as opposed to St.
Peter Brook's sort of absolutely star production of it.
It reads a bit stiff and wooden, and it goes rambling off.
There were a lot of art forms in the 60s that were very rambling and sort of repetitive.
Anyway, but I find it much more interesting now than I did then, because I see how it fits into the way everything worked.
And at the time, you know, the Moore's murders, which keeps cropping up in this novel.
On the whole, I turned away from them in terror and fear.
You know, I didn't, I would scan the accounts of the trials of these people very, very fast, because I felt you ought to know what was happening, but I didn't want to
linger on it, because it just made me feel too ill.
Plus, you don't want it to be a work of journalism either, in that respect.
No, I mean, then I didn't look at it.
I did look at it now when I was doing the research, because it fitted.
Do you like milk?
Yeah, I just like when I'm black, thank you.
Right.
There's sugar there.
Yes, no, I don't take sugar.
I find if I drink too much black coffee, you get very jittery, and I've got very jittery anyway with
I like the caffeine, actually.
I like real proper caffeine.
I'm sorry.
I guess you've kind of answered the question of how you visualise the quartet.
How does it fit in?
Do you see this all as a corpus, as a body of work?
I mean, would you like this all to be... What, all my work?
Well, actually, I've not said this before, but I've had this interesting idea...
I wrote Possession, which is around, set in the year of Darwin's writing of the Origin of Species in 1859.
And then I wrote Angels and Insects, and the insects bit is in the 1860s, and the angels bit moves on into the 1870s, 1880s.
I have a novel I want to write next when I finish the quartet, and the one I want to write after that
is about that kind of group of people in the 1890s, 1900s.
It's going to be done from the point of view or about a children's writer like E. Nesbitt.
But she lived in a world which contained all the geneticists who believed in eugenics and all the proto-socialists.
She knew H.G.
Wells very well.
He tried to seduce her daughter.
She knew George Bernard Shaw.
And I want to do something, I mean, it won't be like that, but that world, Havelock Ehrlich, all the earliest.
But then in a sense, you see, I've got a great historical run.
And the one I want to do after that, which doesn't yet have a title, or if it does, I've forgotten it because I'm so tired, is about two women psychoanalysts.
Sounds wonderful.
I wanted to do an American and a Middle European, but I think I can't write an American.
So I think I'll write an English woman psychoanalyst in the time of Freud and Jung.
You had a pretty good American in possession, though.
I mean... Well, I was rather fond of both my Americans in possession, but I do know that they were broad-outline caricatures.
I taught American literature for a long time, and I made Professor Crocker out of all the preoccupations of 19th-century American literature, you know, the kind of Gothic, the interest...
The Edgar Allan Poe interest in mortality, and all those.
He came out of all those communes that sprinkled around the time of Henry James and Hawthorne.
One of the chapters in my own book, I did a chapter on the University of Texas, and the institutional bibliomania that took place there.
this gluttonous desire to get everything.
And you had it right on.
Well, he is it.
I mean, I did actually.
I got very fond of him.
Well, I'm glad you liked him.
No, I do think...
I mean, Texas is a very interesting phenomenon.
As you say, it really is love, isn't it?
It is, yeah.
But it's also without a possession.
Are you familiar with the Texas phenomenon?
A little bit, yes.
I could send you a copy of my book.
I would be very glad to have your book.
You'd enjoy it, because you're in it, number one.
I should have thought to bring a copy, I'm sorry.
But go ahead.
No, if you could get someone to post it to me.
I would be even more grateful because I'm going round and round on tour.
If you give me an address, I'll post it to you.
How's that?
That would be even better, but I could get my publishers to post it without causing you angst.
Either that or I'd be happy to do it if you just tell me where to send it.
Right.
Before we forget, we don't have a copy.
We don't have a British edition yet, so I'm running again.
My eyes are terrible.
These computer screens have killed my eyesight, I can tell you.
Do you write on a computer?
No, I write with a pen, which produces the kind of writing I do.
I do my journalism on a computer, but I do it mostly by not looking at it and just thinking it in my head and typing it off the keys.
I don't look at it much when I'm actually doing it.
Do you notice a difference in the writing?
Yes.
Everybody says that computers make them write longer.
True.
They make me write much shorter.
Really?
When I've got a word check,
I find that a thousand word review, I quite often have said everything I want to say in about 750 words.
Whereas if I'm doing it by hand, it will run over.
Well, I count them less accurately, and then it's nice to be able to just push two keys and get an exact count.
And as you pointed out in one of your collections of criticism, I forget which one that was, you know, you are writing differently when you're writing for money at length.
You know, when you're writing, it's an entirely, I mean, I write on deadline every week.
No, it's in art form.
I mean, it's like the sonnet in one sex, you know, it's got to be done precisely.
14 lines.
Yeah, exactly.
And I mean, most reviews are about 14 lines.
And you get, well, it says in that novel, you get to know what kind of vocabulary you can use and what you can't.
There's a lot of young men reviewing in England at the moment who don't seem to realise that you can't quote extensively in a review of a thousand words because it leaves you no time to say anything.
That's right.
But the lazy people know that and do that.
They don't do it out of laziness.
They do it because they've been taught close reading at university.
Mm-hmm.
and they feel they have to demonstrate their point.
And what they do is they pick out a paragraph, which is part of a much larger structure, which, of course, they haven't left themselves space to describe, even if they understood it.
And then they say, look at that silly word in the second line of this paragraph.
How could she use that word?
Or how could he use that word?
And they make themselves look very clever.
But actually, what they're doing doesn't mean very much.
And as a piece of writing, it's always very lopsided because of this silly quote.
Whereas I've learned, you know, in a thousand words you can quote one and a half lines maximum of the thing you're reviewing.
And if you were George Eliot when she was reviewing, you had two columns for you to write, and then you had two or three pages of quotes.
Wonderful.
Which was wonderful, because it meant she could really give an example.
Even today, a thousand words is quite an indulgence.
I mean, I write thousand word pieces, and I have to tell you, the newspapers that take me
Really, it's a big deal.
They give me a lot.
A thousand words is about as big as you can get in a newspaper.
That's why I mentioned it.
And my word counter, I quit at a thousand words.
Or if I run over it, then I edit it down and tighten it up.
I mean, I can do 600 words, too.
I can even do 200 words.
I mean, there, the skill is to say anything at all.
I like the two.
You know, I've written quite a few of these.
This one I'll go back on and talk about.
And I promise not to take up too much of your time.
I have your, I know your biography, I've read articles, so I'm not going to bore you with questions that you've been asked dozens of times, and undoubtedly have answered them the same way, so we won't bore you with that.
I really am interested, however, in getting back to, you know, you gave me a very interesting answer on the corpus.
Do you have a reader in mind when you're writing these books?
Because I know you certainly have a very strong academic background, and I know you bristle at suggestions, rightfully so,
that you're an academic who writes novels for the general readership, and perhaps you could address all of those things, if you might.
Yes, I've never thought of myself as an academic, because, you know, when I was very young, I made a choice about whether to be an academic or whether to be a writer.
And I did decide to be a writer.
And I taught university for 11 years, but that was mostly to earn money to put the children through school.
I used not to have a reader in mind very much.
I mean, I used to sort of say, as a joke, if I was asked, I would say, yes, I write for Henry James.
And he has had a surprisingly large and durable readership of people who are not academics.
I...
I have a New York edition of Henry James, which is a big deal.
Oh, yeah.
It's the 1922.
Oh, it was wonderful, yeah.
Where he went in and he wrote his prefaces and he started tinkering with the works themselves.
I've got one or two of that edition, but not a run of it.
I would love to have a run of it.
Anyway, I used to think I was writing for him.
You know, I used to think he would understand what I was trying to do, put it that way.
And now I do know that I have a lot of readers of very many different kinds.
This makes you actually feel quite comfortable with yourself because if you can write something as historical and as, in many ways, intellectual as possession and become a bestseller, you can presumably do anything.
Did that shock you, surprise you?
I thought it would sell quite well.
I would have guessed it would have sold sort of 25,000 or so in the hardback.
And in fact, it got itself up to 120,000, which is a big difference.
But 25,000 is quite a lot for a... I knew it was a sort of good story that people would enjoy.
And I got terribly upset when all the publishers tried to take all the things out.
But...
And, I mean, writing this one was quite good, because I've done so many readings in so many countries, and people kept saying, what's happened to Frederica, what will happen to Frederica, why haven't you finished it?
Because I knew it had its readers who were waiting for it.
And, um... Do you have a little top on your... Probably not, because I've made it too strong.
No, no, I need to be able to put a little more milk in it, and then it'll be fine.
Yes, um...
It's a nice hotel, by the way.
It does seem to be, yes, and it has good bread.
I've been through a few hotels that the bread was black.
I have very few offices stay here.
I've been interviewing the office for close to 20 years, by the way.
So I know I've been to every hotel, I think, in the northeast.
Well, they've very kindly picked all my hotels so that I can go swimming.
Oh, wonderful.
And then, of course, they scheduled it so that I actually can't go swimming.
Oh.
Because the moment I come in, I have interviews, and then I go on until about 11 at night, when even if the swimming pool were open, I somehow can't.
Maybe tomorrow morning, you'll be here tonight?
Yes, I've got a very great friend in Cambridge, who I hope to manage to see.
She's my very best friend, and possession is dedicated to her, and she's a distinguished professor of English who is on a year's sabbatical here.
And who is she?
Her name is Isabel Armstrong from Henry James Inn.
And she's a great Victorian scholar.
When she came over here to write a book on, she's writing an interesting book about glass and the idea of glass and the literary idea of glass, but also the substance itself and the production of glass.
Well, have you ever been to the faculty club at Harvard?
That's the site of where the Jameses lived.
Yes, not since 1958, which is a long time ago.
But that's, I was just there recently, and there's a sign out there, this is where, you know, James Senior had his home.
I must be one of the few people that has really read the work of James Senior.
It was interesting.
Senior?
Wow.
Well, I used to teach Henry James, I mean, after I decided.
And I used to do a series of lectures on...
Henry James Senior and William James and Henry James and Henry James Senior's Swedenborgianism and whether or not that fitted onto the works of James Junior.
And I'm pretty sure it did.
And there was a book that came out when I was an undergraduate that said, you know, if you read James Senior, you see all sorts of things in James Junior.
And I sat down and read The Secret of Swedenborg.
And is it true?
Oh yes, you definitely do.
which is extremely interesting.
You see all sorts of new ways of looking at him and new angles to look at him from.
And he fits much more into this whole... The moment I get off myself, I get interested in things.
He fits much more into this whole 19th century spiritual, religious pattern with Henry James, Jr.
than you would ever have thought if you don't read Henry James, Sr.
You know there's a new biography in progress of William James.
Oh, who's doing that?
Justin Kaplan was, I'm pointing to Cambridge across the river, but he stopped because somebody else started, and I'll remember it before we're done, but quite a notable biographer, and to the point that now Justin is no longer doing women, a major American biographer.
In any case,
You don't mind my asking a few questions that are totally unrelated to, I am interested in, I'm writing a new book now, and I'm really interested in how extensively the reading of authors influences their writing, and I know that you are quite a reader, a voracious reader, and perhaps even a bibliophile, I don't know if that, do you collect books, by the way?
I own a large number of books, but I only collect them for the contents, you know, they're never the
occur to me to go out and look for a first edition.
I just like what's in there.
But when you say a large number, what would a large number be?
I should think about, I should guess 12,000.
That's quite a good size.
I mean, the house is full of books, and it was 3,000 about, the 3,000 were insured in about 1960-something, and I've been buying them at great speed, I've
Does your reading, would you say, I mean, it seems like a silly question, but I'm wondering if you can see in your own work the influence of the books that you read?
Oh, yes.
I feel that, I mean, I feel that the great writers of the past are my ancestors, as it were.
You can always learn something.
And also, I think, you know, books are as real to me as people.
I mean,
you get the sort of sense of the shape of a book.
I can't imagine, you know, occasionally you go into a house where there isn't a book.
My mother-in-law had about eight books, and most of those were books of poetry, and she read them and re-read them with great passion.
But how she could stop there and have just eight, you know, she had one little bookcase,
with an arch over the top, and it had these row of books.
And there were two, three 1930s novels and about half a dozen good books of poetry and a gardening book, and that was it.
I just can't imagine that.
You know, I can't... I feel that that isn't quite a lie.
Do you have books that you haven't read in your home?
I used not, and now I do.
I've got quite a lot of books that I haven't read, and these are of two kinds.
Well, three kinds, really.
They're the ones I've bought
because I know I need them for my research, and I haven't yet got round to reading them.
And there are the ones I've bought, because that looks quite interesting, and I haven't got round to reading those as well.
And then there are the ones that people send me, and in my position you get sent hundreds of books.
And some of them come from the author saying, please will you write something on the back of my book.
And some of them come from the publisher.
I mean, you know, one came from my own publisher not long ago saying we're publishing this.
groundbreaking new biography of Henry James, which we really think, you know, we think so, would you care to write something?
And the only way I can deal with all this is to write back to absolutely every single one, even my best friend, and say, no, I will not write anything on the back of anybody's book, ever.
And I say, if I write a review of your book, then obviously you can quote my review, but
But that's public, you know.
I don't like the private backstretching.
And also, the only way I can cope with the people is to make it quite clear to all of them that I won't even consider it.
Which is the way to do it.
Yeah, it's quite worrying.
My book had no blurbs.
We had some nice quotes, which we didn't use, because we had such a dramatically beautiful dust jacket.
Oh, yes.
The Durer engraving of the book pool.
Lovely, lovely.
And it was so wonderful.
And my book has gone into its fifth frame.
It's up to 60,000 books.
Well, it's on the sort of subject that... It's about this wit, this cup, too.
That's good, yeah.
It's on a subject that will always... I mean, you will always have readers.
I think you'll like it.
I'll send it to you when I get back home.
Briefly, to get back to Possession, was that a liberating book for you in that?
I mean, it's been called the breakthrough book, I don't know.
Yeah, well, I mean, in a way, it was a breakthrough book.
Yes, it was a liberating book, partly because it was actually quite easy to write, although it looks very complicated.
And partly because everybody liked it so much, and almost nobody dislikes it, as far as I can see, which ought to make one a bit suspicious of it.
Are you fearful of so much public...
approbation, you know?
Well, what I feel is, which is right, of course, is that at the moment there's that much public approbation.
The sort of cut-and-thrust young journalists will decide that you need taking down a couple or two.
They will decide you need to be cut down to size.
And they don't ask you what you felt about all that.
I mean, what I felt about it all on the whole was I'd better get on with my work.
I have this book and that book that I want to write.
I'm not very good at being famous and
On the whole, I would rather be at home writing a book than on a book tour.
But they think, somehow, that because you have been well-received, you must now be mocked.
This is very tedious, and I've seen it happen to other people so much that I know it isn't, you know, it's not personal.
But it's, nevertheless, they find something personal to be hurtful about, because you've got yourself in the firing line.
Whereas...
But it is nice having the money, apart from anything else.
Indeed.
And that is liberating.
Yeah, it is.
I have to say, my book, which earned out its advance in two days, such a small, tiny advance, and it really does help when you're negotiating the next book, doesn't it?
It really does help, doesn't it, yeah.
And actually, I've got a two-book contract, which is even better.
What are you going to do after this?
I'm going to continue writing about books and book culture and libraries, books of the future.
I'm not done.
I'm just fascinated with books.
I'm going to spend a considerable amount of time in Europe, I think, to do some European stories.
We'll see.
I mean, it's just beginning.
I've just started.
You never know the beauty of what I do.
You write a history of publishing.
That would be interesting.
It would be.
Maybe that'll be the next one.
I don't want to take up too much of your time, and I know that you're worried as a traveling, but I just want to do less, and I've stayed away from, that's my job, to read the book.
We've talked about a few things.
We talked about the 60s.
Is the 60s a fascinating generation, a decade for you?
Not more than any other.
Certainly is in this country.
The 60s is a... Well, it's developed this kind of cult status, and I've taught two generations of students for whom
The 60s was a sort of wonderful image of freedom and bliss and daring.
It didn't feel quite like that when you were living, Stuart.
It didn't feel that different from any other time.
I quite agree.
That's my generation, too.
I think it's partly just a myth.
Well, somebody said there were about a thousand people.
who were the Sixth Years.
And all of them have written their reminiscences saying that everybody was doing what they were doing.
And actually, there were about, I think about a thousand is about right.
That's not a bad idea for a monograph or even a book, is it?
Exactly.
I mean, I think you could... Determining which... Well, that is a terrific idea for me, isn't it?
Yes, and you could get a really top-class photographer to take pictures of them all.
Have you thought of this?
It's not my sort of thing, I just want to get on with my novels, but it's a nice idea.
I'm trying to think who it was that said it, because if it was, for instance, what's his name, Neville, the one who was tried for Oz, he probably has thought of it and is probably doing it himself.
Did Timothy Leary die?
He died today.
I've been thinking about him.
I mean, partly because I've been talking to journalists and bookshop people about the six days.
Either last night or this morning.
I just put it on the news driving in.
Yes, because I saw that his death, as it were, he was conducting his death in public on the television.
And that he was on the internet and all this.
What do you feel about books in the future?
Do you have a sense?
I have two or three contradictory senses.
This is of great interest to me, by the way.
In fact, it'll probably be quoted in my next book.
I tell you, if you haven't already heard or seen it, George Steiner has been giving a brilliant series of lectures on books of the future.
Really?
He gave a brilliant one I heard in Cambridge last summer.
And he has a son who teaches, I think this is right, he said he had a son who taught disadvantaged children somewhere in North Carolina, I think he said, he may have said South Carolina.
And he goes there with holograms and CD-ROMs.
And he could offer them the whole of the Library of Congress and the whole of the British Library on these CD-ROMs, although these kids haven't the money to buy a book.
And he said that this is good.
And then he has a daughter who is an anthropologist or some sort of something, or a sinologist, I forget, but she's somewhere in Harvard or Yale.
And she endlessly communicates her papers by sticking them into the internet and immediately getting back comments on email.
And she's connected into the major people in her
Now, this obviously is going to make the physical book less necessary, but I still think there will be physical books, because I think people need to carry them about in their pocket and read them in airplanes.
I think for literature, the book lives.
I think for literature... But I think for research and for precisely the kinds of things you're describing right now, these new devices are... The thing is, of course, that any of those things can be made into a book if you happen to want it to.
If you talk to scientists,
They say there is no reason to publish in book form most scientific papers.
It is enough that there should be an internet register or a CD-ROM register of all the titles and the crises.
And in a way, you know... This does reflect the body of opinion now, is that right?
Well, it does of the scientists, I think.
I think they think that any scientist can then, as it were,
clock into there, and can draw out any paper they want to read.
So the paper can be put down on a computer and put in.
And it need never be printed out in a book.
There's a brand new library just opened in New York.
It's a division of the New York Public Library.
It's called Sybil, science, industry, business, whatever.
So it is all technical.
$100 million, and there are just books there as decorations.
It really is all to log in.
Thank you.
And there's, I'm also told, I'll be going out there, there's a brand new college just established in California, in Monterey, by the state of California, that was built without a library.
There actually is not a building there to hold books, which I find reprehensible.
Well, I find that very disturbing and distressing, yes.
But it is a very technical kind of an institution.
But there are buildings, there are libraries in California if you wanted to go and find one.
not as extraordinary as Texas.
Really.
Let me tell you also that when I was doing my master's thesis back in the 60s, it was on the Bobby Baker case, and I remember using the Profumo scandal as a reference, you know, as a British counterpart to...the Baker case wasn't nearly as sexy as the Profumo scandal, but you do draw on that here.
And of course, tell me briefly about the Subsidia case and why that was
necessary for you, particularly in the concept of this book.
Thank you.
My obscenity case.
Is this tea or coffee?
Coffee.
It looked a different colour, that was all.
It's partly because there were a lot of obscenity cases.
It's a book that's essentially about the relationship of language to things and language to life and the way it gets torn apart and
I remember in the 60s I knew a lot of people who gave evidence both in the Lady Chatterley trial and in the trial of last exit to Brooklyn.
And they were describing to them a sense they had that the whole of the language they wanted to use was being distorted by the legal process.
They couldn't say what they would have liked to say.
They were having to say something else.
The whole process was driving them to talk in a different way.
I got quite interested in that.
And then...
And I wanted to contrast that sort of public distortion with the private distortion of a divorce which in those days had to be adversarial.
And I was interested in courtroom narratives.
I mean, just as Possession is interested in detective stories and romantic love stories.
This is interested in the nature of the courtroom narrative and how it changes the people.
So, for all those reasons it got in.
And then there is a place where it all comes together in the Moore's murders because there was a lot of argument about whether we should or shouldn't censor the Marquis de Sade.
And the last exit case was lost because the jury brought a verdict against last exit in Brooklyn.
And this was overturned on appeal because I think all the lawyers felt
that on the whole the book ought to be published, even the ones who were prosecuting, and so the judge found various reasons.
And last exit went through.
But at exactly that point, sort of in 1967, the Moores murderers were tried.
And when you looked at Brady's library, he had quite an extensive library of the Marquis de Sade and the Nuremberg trials and various other posts about torture.
And that really frightened people.
It produced a kind of wash of feeling about how perhaps these things were dangerous when we had just thought that we were being immensely liberal and free and we could publish everything.
Well, there's a very interesting resonance today, the Unabomber.
They're really trying to look at what he read and they're trying to find the books that he might have taken out of this university in Montana.
And this fascinates me.
Well, it fascinates me.
I mean, the libraries of murderers actually are fascinating.
The libraries of almost anybody, of course, is...
That might be a pretty good chapter for me, actually.
It might, if you know any more murderers.
But Brady's library is completely recorded.
Really?
Yes.
Has it been written up anywhere?
No, but there is a sort of, you have to get a hold of it a second.
There is an ancient Penguin transcript of the trial, not a complete transcript, but written at the time of the trial.
I'll look at that at Harvard.
I'm sure you can.
And they list the books that he was found to have.
Well, that's great.
which is very interesting.
I'm making a research trip to Wyden next week, so that'll be... I'm not going to take up too much of your time.
I love what you write, and I'm a fan, and I wonder would you kindly inscribe a couple of books for me?
Certainly I will.
I'll give you my... Very briefly, writing... Were you surprised by the American reaction to possession after your books?
Did you expect to give this kind of an American readership?
No, I don't think I did.
I always felt that my earlier books...
If they had gone into paperback, the Americans would have liked.
And in fact, when they did go into paperback, the Americans did like them, because one of the good results of possession was that still life then went into paperback and sat on the New York Times paperback bestseller list for quite a long time, which, you know, was unexpected, and nobody did bother to put it into print.
And I think, you know, the thing about possession appealing to the Americans that most pleased me was that they do seem to like all the others.
The others are all now in print, and they seem to be staying in print.
And do you hear from them, or is it just the sales figures that lead you to believe this?
Do you hear from the readers at all?
Oh, I hear from the readers a great deal, and I very much enjoy it.
I sat next to a lady on the airplane coming here, and she said she had once written a letter to an author, but he hadn't answered.
And so I explained that, you know, I get
a lot of letters and if I'm not in a terrible mess I answer them politely and carefully every now and then you just get too many and you're too much in a rush and you're trying to finish a book and you always have to reply to the bank manager whether you want to or not so these letters are the cream really but it has made a great difference having all these American readers and I love you know I love talking to them in the bookshops because
They do take the book slightly differently from the English.
That was my next question, yeah.
So they do respond just a bit differently.
Yes, they do, and they give you a new, you know, they give you yourself a new word.
Some of it, a lot of the response is the same.
Reader response is one of the vital signs, though, isn't it, of the writing life?
I mean, you find that you're not writing into a vacuum, and it's not just reviewers who are the arbiters.
Yes, reviewers in many ways bear no relation to readers, but it takes a few years of being reviewed for you to understand this.
You know, reviewers have their own agenda.
They have their own knowledge.
And they already, they come, I think, quite often with preconceptions about what it's going to be and what they're going to say.
which the book doesn't always change, even if it should have done.
But readers come all innocent and open, and if they don't like your book, they just stop reading it.
And if they do like it, then they respond with generosity.
It's a wonderful quote.
And it's much the best thing, really.
Let's quit on that.
That's a wonderful quote.